Time to dive back into the AWS Cloud9 IDE.
This go‑around, we are going to integrate a Git project with
Cloud9 and highlight some of Cloud9's features that are
useful for larger scale projects.
Now that we're back in the Cloud9 console,
the first thing we are going to do is integrate a Git project to pull
external source code from a Git repository into our local Cloud9
environment. In the Cloud9 general starting page, there is a quick link
to Clone from GitHub, so let's select that. So we can see this
automatically initiates a bash terminal session for us with the git
clone command auto‑populated.
From here,
we just need to plop in the URL for our Git environment that
we want to clone into our Cloud9 session.
I've created a single Git project for use of this course,
and I'll insert that URL here for a quick demo.
Now that I pressed Enter,
we can see that the Git project is downloaded and we now have a
Pluralsight‑Cloud9Demo folder in our working directory with our new
project downloaded. When developing with Cloud9 using Git,
you can leave this terminal open and then later use it to
commit code updates to your Git project.
However, since I'm only using it to clone an environment for this demonstration,
I'm going to go ahead and close it out.
Now let's open up the index.js file from our project,
which in the Node.js world is the first file that gets executed by default.
We have 21 lines of code here,
so let's break this down to dissect what this code snippet is actually doing.
We have an execute function defined in the body of our file,
and then we can see that on line 21 that this execute function is called so
that it will execute when our index.js file is ran. At the top of our
program, we are importing in three different files which contain player
rosters of Dallas professional sports teams.
So let's say we want to view one of our imported files to see what
code it contains. We can use the File Explorer on the left‑hand side
of our screen to select the dallasMavericks.js file and then drag it
into our Cloud9 IDE. Our dallasMavericks.js file is open as a new tab
within our primary pane.
If we want to view this and the index.js file at the same time,
we can grab our dallasMavericks.js tab and drag it in one direction
or the other to create a new pane within Cloud9.
We now have two different panes,
one that contains the index.js file and the one on the right
containing our dallasMavericks.js file.
We can arbitrarily drag multiple files in this same method to
create an arbitrary configuration of visual panes.
So now that we have both files visible and easy for reference,
let's take a look at what this code is doing.
So on the left‑hand side, let's take a look at the index.js execute command.
The first thing our execute function does is on line 5 it grabs the
value from an environment variable named CURRENT_TEAM.
Now,
if you remember from our graphic earlier, environment variables are
used to dynamically change the execution of a program.
So in this case,
we can see that the current team environment variable value is grabbed
and then used in a switch statement to determine which external file is
called. In the case our environment variable has the value Mavericks, our
switch statement would run the getPlayerRoster function from our external
dallasMavericks file,
which we currently have open in our right‑hand pane. Our
getPlayerRoster function is fairly straightforward.
Essentially,
it just returns a hard‑coded array of values that contain the name and number of
several players from the Dallas Mavericks basketball team.
It looks like our execute function can actually call one of three different
external files, so let's go ahead and open up the other two so we can see
what they look like. Again, by dragging the file by name on our left‑hand
File Explorer into our Cloud9 editor,
we can place it into an existing pane or arbitrarily create a new one.
If we place our dallasStars and dallasCowboy files in our right‑hand pane,
we can see that we have three tabs within that pane that represent
all of our files imported by the index.js file.
Now that we have a pretty basic understanding of what this code does
and how we can arbitrarily set up panes and tabs within Cloud9, let's
go ahead and use the Play button to run this code. Quickly we can see
that we have an output in our terminal window that says no environment
variable specified.
So it's fairly obvious based on this error message that we don't have a
current team environment variable set in this environment.
A quick glance at our execute commands in our index.js file
shows that if our current team environment variable is not set
to one of the three accepted values,
it will hit the default, setting in the switch statement,
which will basically output no environment very well‑specified to our console,
which is the message we are seeing.
So let's go ahead and set our current team environment variable
to get this up and running properly. In the bottom of our
screen where our program output is, we have our run configuration displayed.
If we select the ENV button,
we can pull up a quick environment variables Quick Access menu.
Here we can type a name and value of an environment
variable to add it to this run configuration.
I'm going to add the CURRENT_TEAM environment variable with
the value of mavericks to our run configuration here, so the
next time we execute our program,
it will be available. With our environment variable set up and ready to go,
let's run this program one more time. And boom, we can quickly see that now
that our program execution had an environment variable available that it
outputted the roster of the Dallas Mavericks.
Let's go ahead and try changing our variable to get a different team roster
on our next execution. If we update the run configuration environment
variable to a new value of cowboys and hit Run,
we can see that we now get the values from our dallasCowboys.js file.
If we wanted to debug this session,
we could click a line number in our gutter, as we did in the previous
demo, and then rerun our debug configuration to pause the execution on
that specific line. For a quick demo, let's go ahead and put a
breakpoint on line 5 and 6 to rerun this.
Now that our program has ceased execution on line number 5, a useful tool
within Cloud9 we mentioned earlier is the Immediate window,
which basically allows us to quickly run code
snippets within our current environment.
We can select the Immediate button on the bottom right of our screen to
pull up the Immediate window into the bottom of our screen. On line 5 of
our code, we can see that we use the process.env command to access
environment variables in our system,
which this is the default method within Node.js to access environment
variables. Depending on the programming language you're using, the syntax
for grabbing environment variables will vary some,
but essentially the concept will be the same. In the Immediate window, we can
type process.env and press Enter to view the current value of all of our
environment variables within our current running session. You can see that a
lot of environment variables are created by default that contain metadata
related to our current running environment.
I often use the Immediate window when debugging if I want to run quick code
snippets or view specific properties and variable data specific to my
running environment that aren't clearly visible based on my current
debugging setup or active panes. I recommend using the Immediate window
whenever the opportunity presents itself,
as it can be a quick way to run code within your executing environment.
If we look back at our debugger,
we can select the Step Over debugging option to continue
execution within this current file.
Now that we're in a switch statement,
we can see that using the Step Over command has taken us to line 14,
where the Cowboys PlayerRoster function is called.
Since we know this is calling an external function,
let's review the debugging options that we have available to us.
Pressing the Continue Play button would execute the program until completion,
since no other breakpoints would be hit.
Selecting the Step Over command would take us to the next
line of execution within the current file.
And if we use the Step Into command,
we would take us to the getPlayerRoster function
within our imported dallasCowboys file.
Since we haven't tested it out before,
I'm going to go ahead and select the Step Into command to take us inside the
Cowboys getPlayerRoster function. We can see in our active execution that we're
now in the dallasCowboys.js file, and we can see the hard‑coded player array
that is going to be returned by the function.
This is a good opportunity for us to test the Step
Out of debugger command in Cloud9.
If we remember from earlier,
the Step Out of command will take us up one level within our
current call stack. When debugging in Cloud9,
you can easily view the active call stack list by referring to the
right‑hand debug windowpane. We can see that our active function,
getPlayerRoster, is at the top of our call stack,
and directly beneath it is our execute function from our index.js file.
Selecting the Step Out command would step out of our current
function and go up one level down the call stack.
When you select the Step Out button here,
we can see that it takes us back to the index.js file,
which outputs the results of the getPlayerRoster function.
With this simple example,
we just covered many Cloud9 run configuration and debugging concepts,
as well as how to create arbitrary configurations of
your working area using panes and tabs.
Leveraging these simple concepts,
you can better optimize your development and create more advanced applications more efficiently using Cloud9.